DOC revamp model persistence documentation (#18046)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/modules/model_persistence.rst

=================

After training a scikit-learn model, it is desirable to have a way to persist

> the model for future use without having to retrain. The following sections give

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the model for future use without having to retrain. The following sections gives
```

=================

After training a scikit-learn model, it is desirable to have a way to persist
the model for future use without having to retrain. The following sections give
you some hints on how to persist a scikit-learn model.

.. note::

>    Remember that, once exported in a persistent format, the model could only be

Reviewer: Uhm I am not sure indeed. With a pickle and if you are lucky, you could do a new round of `partial_fit` to update the model while with ONNX or PMML you will not have access to this method. It was more in this regard that I was thinking to put the note in the section below.

Author: I understand... but I don't think it is safe to let people try... I prefer to tell users not to do this anyway: fit is not for persistent storage, if users do it, it is at their own risk.

Reviewer 2: maybe then

could -> should
cannot be -> shouldn't be

so that it's clear that it's a recommendation rather than a technical limitation

=================

After training a scikit-learn model, it is desirable to have a way to persist
the model for future use without having to retrain. The following sections give
you some hints on how to persist a scikit-learn model.

.. note::

   Remember that, once exported in a persistent format, the model should only
   be used for predictions and cannot necessarily be refitted as information

>    about the original hyper-parameters might not have been exported

Reviewer 3: this is not true of Pickle as long as the data is stored too.

I feel like at the moment this comment has the potential to raise the confusion more than to avoid errors.

Author: I have removed it : the note was already a bit controversial.

If you want to know more about these issues and explore other possible
serialization methods, please refer to this
`talk by Alex Gaynor
<https://pyvideo.org/video/2566/pickles-are-for-delis-not-software>`_.

Interoperable formats
---------------------

For production and quality control needs, exporting the model in `Predictive
Model Markup Language (PMML)
<http://dmg.org/pmml/v4-4-1/GeneralStructure.html>`_ or `Open Neural Network
Exchange <https://onnx.ai/>`_ format
would be a better approach.

PMML is an extension of the `XML
<https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extensible_Markup_Language>`_ document standard

> defined to represent data mining and models. Beeing human and machine readable,

Author: Is that more understandable now? Thanks.

PMML is a good option for model validation on different platforms and

> long term archiving. On the other hand, as XML in general, its verbosity does
> not help in production when performances are the issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
long term archiving. On the other hand, as XML in general, its verbosity does
not help in production when performance is critical.
```

If you want to know more about these issues and explore other possible
serialization methods, please refer to this
`talk by Alex Gaynor
<https://pyvideo.org/video/2566/pickles-are-for-delis-not-software>`_.

Interoperable formats
---------------------

> For production and quality control needs, exporting the model in `Predictive

Reviewer: I am thinking that we could be explicit that the model will only use the prediction part without the possibility to be refitted once exported.

Author: I have added a note at the beginning of the section: is that ok with you?

Author: Sorry, still puzzled about the necessity of retraining using a serialized model ... using the original python script seems a more transparent option to me especially if you look for architecture or environment dependencies...
I've modified the note as you suggested... but still not convinced to move it in the interoperable section....

Since a model internal representation may be different on two different
architectures, dumping a model on one architecture and loading it on
another architecture is not a supported behaviour, even if it might work
on some cases.
To overcome the issue of portability, pickle models are often deployed in
production using containers, like docker.

If you want to know more about these issues and explore other possible
serialization methods, please refer to this
`talk by Alex Gaynor
<https://pyvideo.org/video/2566/pickles-are-for-delis-not-software>`_.

Interoperable formats
---------------------

For reproducibility and quality control needs, when different architectures
and environments should be taken into account, exporting the model in
`Open Neural Network
Exchange <https://onnx.ai/>`_ format or `Predictive Model Markup Language
(PMML) <http://dmg.org/pmml/v4-4-1/GeneralStructure.html>`_ format

> might be a better approach than using `pickle` alone.

Reviewer 3: Maybe add something like "These are helpful where you may want to use your model for prediction in a different environment from where the model was trained."

ONNX is a binary serialization of the model. It has been developed to improve
the usability of the interoperable representation of data models.
It aims to facilitate the conversion of the data
models between different machine learning frameworks, and to improve their
portability on different computing architectures. More details are available
from the `ONNX tutorial <https://onnx.ai/get-started.html>`_.
To convert scikit-learn model to ONNX a specific tool `sklearn-onnx
<http://onnx.ai/sklearn-onnx/>`_ has been developed. 

> PMML is an extension of the `XML

Reviewer 3: It's not really an extension but an implementation or "an XML language".

> <https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extensible_Markup_Language>`_ document standard

Reviewer 3: This link is in french wikipedia

Author: Sorry, I've checked both in English and in French and linked the bad one: fixed now.

Since a model internal representation may be different on two different
architectures, dumping a model on one architecture and loading it on

> another architecture is not supported.

Reviewer 4: Actually I'm not sure this sentence is correct https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/pull/17644#issuecomment-661896033 As long as the Python version and the versions of dependencies are the same it should work. When it doesn't it could be a bug on our side, particularly given that pickle (+ docker) is still the primary method of deployment.

Also (sentence below) containers are architecture specific. They are a solution to reliable deployments and fixing the environment including the dependencies, but not to architecture portability.

Author: > Actually I'm not sure this sentence is correct [#17644 (comment)](https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/pull/17644#issuecomment-661896033) As long as the Python version and the versions of dependencies are the same it should work. When it doesn't it could be a bug on our side, particularly given that pickle (+ docker) is still the primary method of deployment.

I've tried to mitigate the sentence: but the point here is more if scikit-learn developers are willing to guarantee pickle portability than about pickle portability itself.

> Also (sentence below) containers are architecture specific. They are a solution to reliable deployments and fixing the environment including the dependencies, but not to architecture portability.

Again, I've tried to mitigate the sentence, but IMO any solution enforcing portability and interoperability is architecture dependent, the goal is to make this dependence invisible to the user. The "pickle + docker" option offers to the user a way to run predictions with a model trained on a different architecture... obviously the producer of the model should provide the right "packaging" to the user.

(PMML) <http://dmg.org/pmml/v4-4-1/GeneralStructure.html>`_ format
might be a better approach than using `pickle` alone.

ONNX is a binary serialization of the model. It has been developed to improve
the usability of the interoperable representation of data models.
It aims to facilitate the conversion of the data
models between different machine learning frameworks, and to improve their
portability on different computing architectures. More details are available
from the `ONNX tutorial <https://onnx.ai/get-started.html>`_.
To convert scikit-learn model to ONNX a specific tool `sklearn-onnx
<http://onnx.ai/sklearn-onnx/>`_ has been developed. 

PMML is an extension of the `XML
<https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extensible_Markup_Language>`_ document standard
defined to represent data models together with the data used to generate them.
Being human and machine readable,
PMML is a good option for model validation on different platforms and
long term archiving. On the other hand, as XML in general, its verbosity does
not help in production when performance is critical.
To convert scikit-learn model to PMML you can use for example `sklearn2pmml

> <https://github.com/jpmml/sklearn2pmml>`_ distributed under the GNU Affero
> License version3.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<https://github.com/jpmml/sklearn2pmml>`_ distributed under the Affero GPLv3.
```
per https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affero_General_Public_License

If you want to know more about these issues and explore other possible
serialization methods, please refer to this
`talk by Alex Gaynor
<https://pyvideo.org/video/2566/pickles-are-for-delis-not-software>`_.

Interoperable formats
---------------------

For production and quality control needs, exporting the model in `Predictive
Model Markup Language (PMML)

> <http://dmg.org/pmml/v4-4-1/GeneralStructure.html>`_ or `Open Neural Network

Reviewer 4: Maybe let's put ONNX first, I haven't yet met people using PMML in practice :)

Reviewer 5: We should probably mention the license as it's significantly more restrictive than scikit-learn's and people might not expect that.

Author: Done. Also, citing sklearn2pmml for PMML conversion, made me link sklearn-onnx for ONNX conversion.

Exchange <https://onnx.ai/>`_ format

> would be a better approach than using `pickle`.

Reviewer 5: Phrasing "For production and quality control needs... PMML / ONNX would be a better approach than using pickle": I think that most people who use scikit-learn models in production typically deploy pickled models in docker containers. It's perfectly fine as long as you are aware of the limitations of the pickle format, namely treat the pickled model as a piece of executable software (as is typically the rest of the contents of the docker image) rather than a piece of data or self-decribing source code. For organizations that are used to deploying Python and docker in production this is probably the best approach.

To me the pros of using interoperable formats are:
- make it possible to deploy to platforms that do not have Python installed for any reason (e.g. java-oriented sysadmin culture and JVM-centric production & diagnosis tools),
- decouple the trained model from the specific runtime type and version used to train the model.

E.g. some organizations might decide to allow their datascientist to develop models using any technology (e.g. Python, R, spark) but then only deploy PMML or ONNX models on the inference servers of operational reasons.

Author: I've added a line about pickle "containerisation". and reformulate a bit. Your two point are part of the definition of interoperability to me... should I go to this level of detail? Thanks.

PMML is an extension of the `XML
<https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extensible_Markup_Language>`_ document standard
defined to represent data models together with the data used to generate them.
Being human and machine readable,
PMML is a good option for model validation on different platforms and
long term archiving. On the other hand, as XML in general, its verbosity does

> not help in production when performance is critical.

Reviewer 4: Maybe remove the last sentence. Typically a model would be loaded once, and then inference run several times. So the actual format XML vs something else, shouldn't matter much as long as inference is fast.

Reviewer 5: For big models, (e.g. a large RF with deep trees) that XML format can lead to very high storage and CPU time for parsing the XML if I recall correctly.

Author: So, I will keep this way if you don't mind.
